Once around, ton
618, one of the largest and most
luminous objects that astronomers have
ever
found. So, TON 618 is located on the
border of two small constellations just
below the tail of Ursa Major, the great
bear. These are Canice Vanatasi, the
hunting dogs, and Coma Bernese, which is
Bernice's hair. And if you look at the
stick diagrams of these, it doesn't make
any sense at all because Canis fanatic,
the hunting dogs, is just that green
line that goes from alpha coroli to
beta. So somehow one line makes a dog or
several dogs. And then Bernice's hair is
just three stars with two lines between
them and a cluster called Malot 111 to
the side. Uh, and again, why her hair
was in the sky in the first place just
defeats me. But that's where Ton 618 is.
So, what is Ton
618? Well, first spotted in a survey in
1957.
They were surveying faint blue stars
away from the galactic plane, away from
the plane of the Milky Way. In
particular, a lot of these were white
dwarf stars. That very hot bluey white
coloration was a clue that these small
objects were white dwarfs. But they came
across Ton
618. And the full name of it is
Tonanzilla 618, but that's a little bit
hard to say. So everyone calls it TON
618 and it seemed a bit odd. A
photograph of it at the top there, you
can see the bluish white dot in the
center and that slightly separated red
dot which is kind of just another star
in the line of
sight. So what was going on? Well, the
Tontenzilla Observatory located in San
Andreas Chula in Pueblo in Mexico was
carrying out this survey. And when they
found Ton 618, they noticed that it was
much more blue, decidedly violet was the
description. and the two
astronomers gave it catalog number 618
in the catalog that they were
preparing at that point. That was the
end of the matter. It was just noted
that it was slightly peculiar because it
was even more violet suggesting an even
more elevated temperature than a lot of
the other white dwarf stars which they
were
cataloging. But in 1970, the Italian
Observatory of
Bologna noted radio emissions coming
from TON 618. And these intense radio
beams were highly suggestive that what
we were dealing with here was not a
white dwarf star, but a much more
distant quazar, a quazy stellar object.
These were discovered in the 1950s
and60s as extremely luminous objects
that were very bright and had a very
peculiar visible light spectrum. In
fact, the spectrum baffled people so
much the lines didn't seem to match up
with known elements. And this was
because they were actually so far away
that the they were suffering red shifts
of 10 15 20 even 30% of the wavelength.
Um so the ordinary hydrogen lines were
just not being recognized.
And I think it was Donald Lindon Bell in
Cambridge who suggested that these
quazars might be actively feeding black
holes in the nucleus of a galaxy. And
the enormous energy of matter swirling
in and forming an accretion disc around
a black hole might be responsible for
all of these uh incredibly powerful
beams of radiation that were coming out.
And so what we think is going on is that
in the center of the accretion disc you
have ton 618 a super massive black hole.
In fact um these are extremely massive
and are possibly now being given their
own class of ultra massive black holes.
Now we have a diagram here showing tons
618 in terms of its size
2,66 astronomical units. Now the known
size of our solar system goes out to
around about um the orbit of the Kiper
belt and so the diameter would be about
40 the radius would be about 40 AU the
diameter 80 AU. So this is hugely bigger
30 times the size of our solar
system and that radius of
object is directly proportional to its
mass. Black holes are very simple
beasts. They have a mass. They may or
may not have an electric charge. They
may spin but they don't do very much
else. Um so it's very straightforward to
have a mathematical relationship the
spartz chilled formula which relates the
radius to the mass. So radius r is m *
2g / c^ 2 where g is the strength of
gravity, newton's constant and c is the
speed of light. So if you know one, you
can work out the other. And so to be
this big, this must be absolutely
enormous. And in fact, TON 618 is
estimated to be
66 billion, that's a one with nine zeros
after it, times the mass of our
sun. That's about the same as the entire
Milky Way galaxy. And it's
15,300 times more massive than
Sagittarius A star, the super massive
black hole that's in the center of our
galaxy. So this thing is an absolute
monster. Along with that mass comes
enormous power. It's got an absolute
magnitude estimated as
-30.7. Uh magnitudes are a curious
scale. Each step in the magnitude is a
factor of
2.5 in brightness. Um and they go the
wrong way. So the more towards the lower
numbers or higher numbers into the
negative they are the more powerful they
are. The the apparent magnitude of the
sun is around about
minus23 when you see it in the daytime
sky. Um so this thing is vastly brighter
than that. um its absolute magnitude
would be the brightness you saw if it
were at a distance not of the distance
of the sun but at the distance of 10
parex which is 32 light years away. So
if this was 32 light years away it would
still be 2 and a half to the^
7 times brighter than the sun is in the
sky now. And that is just incredible. Um
it's as bright as 140 trillion
suns. That is a lot. That's uh a
thousand times brighter than all the
stars in the whole of the Milky Way
galaxy put together. And this makes TON
618 one of the brightest and most
powerful objects in the known universe.
And it's incredible that we can see it
at all given how far away it
is. We estimate that it is now 18.2
billion light years away from Earth. But
when we give that number, you have to be
a little bit careful. This is what's
called the co-moving distance.
The light travel time to
Earth is only or has only been around 10
billion years. Clearly, the universe is
only 13.8 billion years old. So, for
something to
be 18.2 two billion light years away,
you might straightforwardly expect that
the light wouldn't have had time to
reach us yet because it it would take
18.2 billion years to travel and there's
just not been that much time. So, how
come we can see it? And the answer is
that actually the light has only been
traveling, I say only, 10 billion out of
the 13.8 8 billion year age of the
universe. So we're seeing it as it
was a very very long time ago almost all
the way back to the big
bang. And the light that set
off 10 billion years ago is just
arriving now having traveled all the way
through the universe. But as it was
traveling through the
universe, space was expanding and has
expanded considerably during that 10
billion
years. Now it had to travel through the
newly expanded space ahead of it and
that will cost it the new size of space
divided by the speed of light. But it's
already passed through a considerable
amount of space on the way.
that has expanded after its passage. And
so it only had to pay in terms of time
travel
the speed of light
um cost of traveling that space as it
was as it met it. So the fact that it's
expanded after it's passed through means
that the estimated distance now this
co-moving distance can be larger than
the time in uh billions of years that
the light has been traveling. And in
that same way we think the the universe
is 13.8 billion years old. And therefore
you would imagine that there would be a
sphere of radius that around
you which would be your cosmic horizon.
And it's true. Um but the time for light
to get to us from the big bang in any
direction is therefore 13.8 billion
years. But again the photons have
traveled through space that's expanded
after their passage. And now that
horizon is being stretched out by the
expansion to 46 billion light years in
every direction. Um, and so this is a
little bit mindbending. Takes a bit of
getting your head
around. Uh but it's absolutely
fascinating once you sort of get to the
point of really understanding what is
going on and the fact that it is the
space expanding not the galaxies moving
through space which is often uh
misportrayed in uh presentations the
media likes to give about the expanding
universe expanding from a point and
being like an explosion and all the rest
of it. And so that's really the story of
this incredibly distant, incredibly old,
absolutely monstrous black hole, Ton
618. But is it the largest one we know
about? Well, it might not be because
there is an object called Phoenix A. And
Phoenix A might be even more massive. up
to 100 billion suns, 50 times the size
of the solar system. So big that light
would take 22 days to cross from one
side of it to the other if it was
passing across a length of the diameter
of Phoenix
A. So essentially about double the
diameter of tons 618 and about double
the mass maybe a little bit less than
double the mass but
uh shown here and we're not certain we
haven't measured this
accurately the best way to measure these
things is to see some object in orbit
around the mass and be able to track its
movement and use Kepler's laws of
planetary motion to help us work out the
mass of the thing in the center, but it
seems likely that Phoenix A is probably
bigger and that that would therefore
take the record away from tons
618. And it's located in the Phoenix
cluster. And this is a picture of the
central part of the Phoenix cluster, but
that's another whole story. So, thanks
very much for listening to a trip once
around 618.